---
id: 62
access: 0
references:
  - 56AD67B54C564CE38DFBC33805B74C63
  - 4191005EBBA540D9ABC3BBE60D60E20F
  - E8858E6092AC40569B754BB32098DB77
---
#era200505
It began on May 31. This was Tuesday, the day after Memorial Day, and I would be heading for Jessica Poyner’s office that morning to meet with Jessica and Pete and Joni and Paul and Dad. Pete and Joni had been down for several days and would be flying back to Pullman later that afternoon, but first we were going to get some questions answered about Dad’s trust and estate. When I got out of bed that morning, I walked into the bathroom and sat down on the toilet and looked down at the floor in front of me. I had a vague sensation that something was wrong with my vision, that something in the middle of my view was a bit cloudy, a bit vacant. Closing one and eye and then the other, I realized that the peripheral vision in my right eye was impeded by a curved blind spot, almost as if my nose had swollen out and blocked my vision there. But when I turned my eye away from my nose, the blind patch followed the eye.

I didn’t have a good idea what could be causing this. I knew quite a bit less than I know now about the specifics of how the eye works. I was definitely disturbed by this, but not panicky. I sat and ate breakfast (did I write a journal entry there? maybe I did?) and quietly contemplated the meaning of it. I noticed that as I looked into brighter light that the blind spot turned into a shimmering obstruction that I could see through. I drove to our appointment and did my best to pay attention to all that was going on there. I then drove to work and did the normal things I do there without telling anyone what I was experiencing. I didn’t know how to deal with it. My friend Marshall noticed that I was not in a good mood, but even when he encouraged me to spill the beans about what was bothering me, I kept it to myself. It’s not that I didn’t want to share, exactly. It’s just that I didn’t know what was happening, and as I started to imagine terrible things, I was afraid that I would spill out a lot of irrational things. I had to deal with it quietly for a while.

That night was one of the toughest parts of the whole experience to date. I usually see Zach in the evenings, but he didn’t come home from work that night, didn’t come home until after I went to bed. As a result, I wasn’t able to vent to anyone. I guess there are quite a few people I could have called, but I was still feeling like I had to process it myself.

When I got in bed that night, I feel like I curled up into a ball and turned cold and hard. All I could think about was that I was facing the end, that I was suffering from the effects of a tumor in my head that was beginning to take out my critical functions one by one, that there was no escaping this tragedy, that there was no returning to the relatively carefree life that I’d had before. “In the end there is one dance you’ll do alone.” All the clichés about the loneliness of death seemed to apply. It was a hard night.

#era200506
Wednesday June 1, I’d come to my senses a little bit, realized that I needed to get a doctor to examine me. I called Kaiser’s ophthalmology clinic and explained that I had suddenly lost part of my vision and wanted to get an urgent appointment. “Has this ever happened to you before?” the woman on the phone asked. “No.” She set up an appointment for later that same morning. It was 8:30, and I got my things together and drove to work.

Again, I was quiet with most people at work that morning. I told a few people that I needed to leave for a doctor’s appointment. I gave Joe a better explanation, as I owed it to him. I left work with the expectation that I’d get an examination and then be back. I left my backpack there, left my computer on, and walked out of the office and drove to Kaiser.

My appointment was with Doctor Lauffer. An assistant gave me a preliminary eye test (20-20), a glaucoma test. She put drops in my eyes to dilate my pupils for the doctor’s exam. He looked carefully through the instruments at both eyes, and after just a few minutes declared that I had a detached retina. “Detached retina”—this was immediately comforting to me. I’d heard of this. It sounded common. It suggested to me that something that’s detached can just be put back where it belongs. In fact he explained that it is treatable, usually with success. I had no idea what was involved in the treatment, but he had not said “cancer” or “nerve damage” or other things that seemed a lot scarier to me.

He wanted me to see another doctor right away. At this point I was still assuming that I would get a diagnosis and a plan for treatment that day, and that I could then return to work with an understanding of what would be coming later. After waiting for a while, sitting in a chair in a hallway doing my best to relax, to get into a good frame of mind, it must have been about an hour or so, Doctor Lewis gave me an exam similar to the first one. He concurred with the earlier diagnosis.

He explained to me that there is a relatively new procedure that could work in my case, a procedure that is less invasive and traumatic than the conventional one used to treat this problem. Doctor Lauffer had actually given me a little brochure about retinal detachment that I had looked at while sitting in the hallway, and it described with pretty illustrations the two procedures. So I knew a little bit about them already.

This procedure involved two steps. First, an instrument would be inserted around the side of the eye to the back of the eye, and the tip of the instrument would deliver a freezing effect on the eye, along the area of the detachment. This is done to apply a controlled injury to the effected area, in hopes that it would stimulate a healing response. The second step is to inject a gas into the eye, straight through the front white of the eye. This gas would form a bubble that would float up. By positioning one’s head so that the detachment is straight up, the bubble would press against the detachment, pushing it into place, into the area where the healing was to take place.

I asked Doctor Lewis, “When do you want to do this?” To my surprise, he said “now—as soon as I can clear out my schedule.” I told him that I had driven myself to this appointment, that I had no one with me to drive me home. He said this shouldn’t be a problem. “Most people don’t have much trouble driving with one eye.”
___
#era200505
I said before that I’d been relieved to hear a diagnosis that sounded familiar, sounded common. I don’t think this sense of relief lasted for too long. Maybe it was the brochure that Doctor Lauffer gave me that deepened my understanding of the seriousness of the matter. Maybe it was the fact that they weren’t willing to send me away that day with a few upbeat words and an appointment in another week or two to have some simple procedure done. It was clear that they took my condition seriously, that it was not something they wanted to let slide for even another day.

I called Joe and left him a voicemail message, explaining what I now knew. I told him that they wanted to perform the procedure right away, and that I’d have to get back to him later with an update.

Another hour, perhaps, passed, and finally Doctor Lewis and his assistant, Monique, led me to a room in which they would perform the procedure. He and she chatted casually about the surgical kit they were going through. He said something about having to do these procedures on the weekends without the kits being available. They used to be available, now he has to make them up himself. I took their casual talk as a possible attempt to put me at ease, make me realize that this surgery was not a big deal, that it would all work out fine. If it wasn’t something deliberate, I thought, wouldn’t he be talking to me instead of Monique, wouldn’t he be trying to calm me down?

I was still carrying around that brochure, intending to take it home with me so I could review what was being done to me. As I got onto the table where I would need to lay back, I set the brochure down in the only place I could find that was suitable. I wouldn’t remember to pick it up again when it was all over.

I’d been asking him a number of questions, bordering on the technical, I guess. At one point, almost seeming a little indignant that I would probe so hard, he asked what it was I do for a living, I think trying to understand why my curiosity ran beyond “will this hurt?” and “when can I go home?”

He instructed me to lie back flat on the table, looking straight up at the ceiling. They stretched out a sheet of latex or something like it across my face, having an opening for only the eye to be operated on. He began a series of eyedrops—drops to numb the eye, drops to protect the eye against infection. One of the solutions was orange-brown, and all I could see suddenly changed tint dramatically. With my other eye covered, and a bright light shining down through an eye now flooded with foreign fluids, what I could see was becoming quite abstract.

He began asking a question about “are you planning to take any time off for vacation this summer?”, and I already started trying to answer him before he delivered the final word of his sentence: “Monique”. Again, while I at first thought he was trying to converse with me, to take my mind off the stress of the moment, he was in fact talking to his assistant. This seemed a bit humorous to him. He pointed out that I wouldn’t be going anywhere for a while, certainly not flying on a plane with a gas bubble in my eye. With this I was fully insulted—ok, just a bit—by the fact that he was ignoring me, treating me like I was unconscious there on his table.

I guess maybe he understood my desire to engage with him a little better from that point. He moved the freezing instrument along the side of my eye, something I didn’t really feel much, and explained that this would feel a little strange, kind of like an ice cream “brain freeze”. This was a good description of it. It was indeed a strange and not very pleasant sensation, but wasn’t too bad. He moved it to a point, and then there was a click as I imagined the tip of the instrument was activated. This produced strange effects in my vision. People often talk about seeing stars in their eyes, but I’d never seen any quite as dramatic as these. They were kind of like little snowflake bursts. In a few minutes he was done with this part, and told me that most people find that to be the toughest part of the experience.

The next step was to inject the gas into my eyeball. At this point I wasn’t seeing much that he was doing, and the local anesthetic was apparently quite effective. I was hardly aware that he had pushed a needle into my eye, though I got the sense that this is what he was doing, carefully pushing the correct amount of gas through.

They asked me to sit up after a few minutes. “Can you see the gas bubble?” he asked. See the gas bubble? This question took me by surprise, as I never expected to be seeing any such thing. But yes, I could see something. It appeared as a dark liquid, sloshing around in the bottom of my eye. Because our vision is inverted, I saw it at the bottom, though it was in fact floating at the top, lighter than the eye’s natural fluids. They taped a patch over my eye and he drew an arrow on it as a guide to how I should position myself for the next five days. The significance of this hadn’t struck me at this point—lying in the same position for five days. He told me that I would need to come back the next afternoon, and he would remove the patch and make sure the eye looked OK.

I gathered my wits about me for a few minutes. The stress of the operation left me a little weak and disoriented, not to mention having only one eye to see with. I felt like such a freak, trying to walk normally through the hallways of the clinic, walking out into the sunshine. Why I allowed him to convince me that I would be fine driving home by myself I don’t know. I now feel embarrassed to admit that I didn’t question this, that I just accepted against my better judgement that this was OK. Parking at Kaiser was still horrible at this time. They were just beginning to alleviate the problem by opening a new facility to reduce crowding here; this was one of the last weeks before the clinic would move to the new building. But as it was, I had parked way down the street and around the corner, and I was now faced with the problem of taking my freakish self down the long sidewalk, passed people in cars and on foot who gawked at me. By the time I finally reached my car, sitting on a quiet residential street, I got in and sat still for a few minutes and tried to gain some composure. What else can I do, I thought. I started the car and began the drive home.

It wasn’t the most the most difficult thing I’d ever done, but it was scary. I wondered what would happen if a cop saw me driving with a big patch over my right eye. What could I say? I’m sure I would have done my best to explain the circumstances, and I surely would have pointed out that it was the attending doctor who assured me that it was OK to do this. I have a feeling that the average cop would have had little interest in the doctor’s opinion on this. After what felt like a long and perilous drive, I finally arrived home, and I assumed the position that I would lay in for the next five days—on my left side, head on two pillows sloped up from my neck at an angle of about 30 degrees.
___
#era200506
So, on Tuesday June 7 I was back at work, trying to adjust to being upright all the time instead of lying down, trying to adjust to the bright lights instead of the dark. It was difficult for a couple of days, but I felt myself ease back into the routine. One thing that was different is that I was driving myself to work instead of taking mass transit. This gave me more time in the morning to sleep, more time in the evenings to rest, and the mobility to get to the doctor for appointments or emergencies.

For about a week or so, the gas bubble remained in my vision. While this was initially an interesting visual phenomena, it quickly became an annoyance. It was a constant obstruction in my otherwise good vision. More significant, I was still seeing the shadow of the detachment in dim light, leading me to believe that the condition had not been fully corrected, and this was supported by Doctor Lewis’s reserved diagnoses during the checkups—he could only declare that the situation was inconclusive, that he couldn’t see for all the fluid built up around the tear if it had properly sealed up. I was feeling anxious much of the time, watching every floater, noticing flashes, which he had warned me could be indications that a tear is about to happen. Nights were particularly difficult for me. I dreaded sundown, as when things got darker around me, I became more aware of all the symptoms. In bright light, they were hardly noticeable.

A few things happened around Wednesday, June 15. It was about this time, maybe a day or two before, that the gas bubble finally disappeared. In the end it shrunk down to the size of a big floater, and it began to behave like a floater too, no longer moving in direct response to the tilting of my head, but fastened to some position at the bottom of my vision, moving as a floater does with little skids and stops in response to my shifting eyes. I was relieved to have my vision nearly back to normal. Still, everyday as I walked into work and ascended the stairs to the second floor—there is something about the lighting in this spot that brings this on—I would feel that subtle darkness, that shadowy vacuum in my vision that reminded me that things weren’t right.

It was around this Wednesday that I first began to notice a new oddity in my vision. Sitting on the living room couch, I noticed that when I blinked my eye, or opened it after it had been closed for a while, I could briefly see the top half of what looked to be a black circle in my bottom right view. This never persisted, I could only see it briefly as my eye adjusted to the light. But I was able to reproduce it in the right conditions at will. While I found this yet another reason to feel disturbed by my progress, or lack thereof, I didn’t imagine that this was another detachment as it looked so different from the first one. The first seemed to have no color—not black, just blind. This seemed so dark, it looked more like a big floater.

At about the same time, I started having strange headaches around the eye, a sort of tingly numbness that seemed to radiate around the eye, and sometimes extend off through my head toward my right ear. These felt similar to the feeling I might get in my head when I was sick with a fever, a kind of oppressive sensation. These wouldn’t last terribly long, but they freaked me out a bit. I was already feeling so anxious about everything that these scared me. I remember feeling one come up while Zach and I sat playing a game of chess, another one lying in bed trying to fall asleep, another on the next day, Thursday, sitting in Joe Lo’s office at work. Throughout this whole ordeal, I understood the importance of maintaining a positive attitude about the healing process, but it was becoming increasingly difficult to do so. I was getting more and more negative about my prognosis.

By Saturday June 18 I was beginning to panic. Becca stopped by in the morning to pick up some cash that I’d agreed to lend Robert. He’d gotten a promotion at UPS, and needed to buy a new wardrobe. I vented to her—she’s had to deal with a lot of that from me during the course of this whole thing, and has been very supportive, though I know it must be weighing on her. She gave me a father’s day card with a very sweet handwritten note that nearly brought me to tears. I felt like I was not long for this world, and as she left the house, I felt almost like I was saying goodbye to her for good. I tried to reach someone by phone in the Kaiser eye clinic, but it became clear after calling a couple of numbers that there was no one staffing this facility except during normal weekday hours. If I was going to seek immediate attention it would need to be through the emergency facility. I had to take a few deep breaths that morning and think about what I was doing. Did I really want to submit myself to a new set of doctors, unfamiliar with my case? After I calmed down a bit, I decided that I would be better off staying at home and being as relaxed as possible than I would be waiting for hours in the hallways and examination rooms of Kaiser. I recognized here that there is a choice each of us must make in situations like this to either take control of our own well-being, or subjugate it to someone else, someone conceived as a higher authority. I was taking a risk by postponing medical attention at this point, but ultimately I decided that this was a risk I could live with, that it was a risk I would not later condemn myself for if it proved a mistake. I became determined to put myself in the best frame of mind possible that weekend, to relax as much as I could, and I would accept the consequences.

The weekend went well, I calmed down quite a bit, and on Monday I called the clinic to let them know that I thought there were changes in my condition that warranted seeing Doctor Lewis sooner than my scheduled appointment, one week later. The person I talked to was not very helpful, she seemed to be put out by my request for an urgent appointment, but in the end she said should would send a message to Monique and ask her to contact me to set something up. I asked them to call my cell phone number, and drove into work.

I waited patiently until late in the afternoon, and finally called Kaiser back to ask about my request. Again, I got someone who was somewhat rude, saying that Doctor Lewis was very busy and they would get back to me when they could. Essentially, I was told to stop bothering them. Actually, this person didn’t even ask for my name or ID number. She didn’t know who she was talking to, and didn’t verify that my request from the morning had been seen or acted on. I have to take some responsibility for this bad communication. I should have insisted that she do these basic things.

The next day, Tuesday June 21—my 53rd birthday—I did get a call from a nurse who apologized to me about the fact that no one had gotten back to me the day before. They had just moved into their new facility at Homestead and Lawrence, and things were a little chaotic.  I explained some of my concerns and she asked a few questions. When I described some discomfort in and around my eye, she suggested that I buy some over-the-counter eyedrops and start using them right away, that dryness in the eye could be part of the problem. She assured me that she would speak to Doctor Lewis and that they would set up an appointment for me if deemed necessary.

As the week went on, I was starting to feel better and better about my situation. I’d had no reoccurrence of the headaches—these had only lasted for a few days, between the 15th and the 18th—and I had calmed down quite a bit. When the nurse called me on Thursday June 23 to tell me that Doctor Lewis could see me the following day, I was tempted to tell her that I would be fine waiting until my scheduled appointment on the following Monday. But I didn’t get a chance, or maybe I didn’t really believe it, and so I said yes, I’d be in to see him on Friday.

I walked into the new Kaiser facility for my appointment on Friday June 24 with some confidence. When Doctor Lewis asked me how I was doing, I described the persistence of the first detachment and told him about the new black half circle. He examined the eye carefully and said that it appeared that there were still small perforations that needed attention. A second bubble procedure might be warranted, he thought, or perhaps even the traditional surgery. And what about the new black half circle, I asked him. It was clear that he had failed to look for this in the exam, and he looked into my eye again. “Ah, well this changes everything,” he said, turning to my file, and drawing the new detachment onto the illustration of my eye. I was losing some confidence in him here, as he’d done what seemed a thorough exam and missed this once. I’d had to remind him about it and prompt him to do a second exam before he saw it. Could he be missing anything else? Could he be seeing only what he was looking for on all these exams, and not what was really there?

We discussed the possibility of another bubble surgery. The new detachment should be easy to treat with a bubble since it was in the top of my eye, where the bubble would rest while I was upright. But I now had two detachments in separate parts of the eye—one (from my view) at the left, and one at the bottom right. A bubble could not treat both simultaneously. Plus, this new detachment was over a week old at this point. I felt resigned and without choice. “Let’s do the conventional surgery,” I told him. We scheduled it for Tuesday June 28, four days from then.

Becca and Zach and I had made arrangements to go out to dinner that night in a belated celebration of my birthday. From the Kaiser parking lot, I gave Becca a call to decide on the time and place. Then I called Joe Lo and told him about the scheduled surgery and the fact that I would be out for a week or two afterwards. I drove home and picked up Zach and we went over to Chevy’s for dinner.

This felt like the last supper. Zach and Becca did their best to keep my spirits up, but I was feeling quite beaten by the latest diagnosis and the events that were on the horizon. I was beginning to take stock of all the things I had to do before the day of the surgery. In addition to my surgery appointment on the 28th, I had a followup appointment the following morning on the 29th. Becca said she could probably drive me to the first appointment, and Zach said he could do the second. Saturday and Sunday (the 25th and 26th) were workdays, as we were going live with CRM 4.0 at work in a long, continuous operation that might involve long nights and little sleep. I was determined to be there, to do this work. I felt a commitment to get this done, for myself as well as for the people I work with. I wrote out a list of things I needed to take care of before the day of the surgery, including stocking the kitchen with plenty of food, and tried to think about when I could get these things done.

Saturday the 25th was a long day—9 to 6, a short break, and then 9 to 12. Steve Francis had paid for several hotel rooms close to work, and I elected to take advantage of this on this night. I drove over, checked in, and went to sleep, feeling privileged to have a little respite. Sunday the 26th was essentially a normal workday, about 9 to 6. In the morning, after having eaten nothing for quite a while, I drank a Jamba Juice drink that someone had bought and ate a sweet muffin. The sugar rush made me feel like maybe I’m diabetic—maybe this is the cause of these eye problems after all. My throat was so tight I could hardly speak, and I felt light-headed, almost faint. In the middle of the day, I went on a half-hour walk to try to burn up all the sugar.

I did my best to prepare for surgery day, did my best on Monday the 27th to wrap everything up at work in anticipation of my departure, and surrendered myself to the course I had accepted.